Your emails are going to spam, but not
for the reason you think. Not because of
your subject lines, not because of your
send time, not even because of your
content. They're going to spam because
Google, Apple, and Microsoft's AI have
decided you aren't trustworthy. And once
that happens, it doesn't matter how
perfect your emails are. While you're
obsessing over pretty templates and
asking Chad GP to write better copy, the
algorithm is destroying your sender
reputation. And every ignored email you
send is making it worse. Let's fix this
before it's too late. I'm Neil Patel,
founder of NP Digital, an award-winning
global marketing agency. We send
millions of emails every month for our
clients. And after serving hundreds of
top marketers and analyzing our own
data, we uncovered the exact behaviors
that trigger AI powered email filters
and how to beat them. In the next few
minutes, I'll show you how to reset your
reputation, retrain the AI, and boost
your open rates past 30% before your
list gets cold and your business loses
most profitable marketing gems. Here's
how.
Every time you send an email, you're not
just reaching out to your audience.
You're actually performing for an
invisible judge that never forgets and
rarely forgives. This judge doesn't care
about your beautiful design or perfect
copy. Instead, it watches something far
more telling. How your audience actually
behaves when your emails arrive. Gmail's
AI, Outlook's filters, and Apple's mail
intelligence systems are all tracking
these kind of behavioral signals like
opens, clicks, replies, deletions, and
most dangerously, the dreaded mark as
spam button. But here's where it gets
really interesting. These systems don't
just track individual reactions. They
analyze patterns across your entire
audience and make predictive judgments
about your future emails. When they
notice that your recent emails are
consistently ignored, they essentially
decide that if people didn't want to see
your last message, they probably won't
want to see your next one either. This
creates what I call an email depth
spiral. Poor engagement on one email
leads to reduced visibility on the next,
which leads to even poor engagement,
which leads to even less visibility.
Before you know it, your emails are
reaching maybe 20% of your list, and
you're left wondering, "What went wrong
with my strategy?" At our agency, NP
Digital, we've analyzed hundreds of
accounts, and here's what we discover.
100% of marketers achieving 30 plus%
open rates understand this fundamental
truth. Engagement doesn't just improve
performance, it determines visibility.
Every ignored email is a vote of no
confidence in your sender reputation.
But here's a silver lining. This same
system that can destroy your email reach
can also amplify it exponentially. When
these AI systems detect consistent
positive engagement, regular opens,
frequent clicks, genuine replies, they
begin to trust you. They start placing
your emails prominently in the inbox.
This allows you to bypass filters that
stop other marketers cold. This
transformation isn't gradual, it's
dramatic. Once you cross the threshold
from untrusted sender to valued contact,
your entire email marketing benefits,
your open rates climb, your
deliverability improves, and suddenly
emails become the reliable channel
you've always hoped it would be. Now, if
you're thinking the solution is just
build a bigger list to compensate for
low engagement, you're about to discover
why that's the worst thing you can do.
Last year, a client came to us
celebrating their massive 50,000
subscriber list, but their email revenue
was declining every month with only 8%
open rates. Here's what was really
happening. 35,000 of their subscribers
had become inbox zombies. Technically
alive, but totally unresponsive. These
are the people who signed up during a
moment of interest, but life moved on.
They hadn't opened an email in months
from this sender, but they also haven't
bothered to unsubscribe. To our client,
these look like potential customers. To
Gmail's algorithm, they look like proof
that this sender creates content that
nobody wants to read. Every time that
they sent to these disengaged
subscribers, they were actively training
the algorithm to suppress their future
emails. The system saw 35,000 unopened
emails and concluded this sender is
irrelevant. But here's the worst part.
This judgment didn't just affect the
emails to these disengaged subscribers.
It affected emails to everyone. When
your overall engagement rates tank, the
algorithm applies that performance score
across your entire list. Even loyal
subscribers who have been opening emails
every month for months started missing
messages because the AI categorized the
sender as low value. So we did something
counterintuitive. We helped them delete
35,000 subscribers. We intentionally
shrunk their list by 70%. The result,
their remaining 15,000 subscribers
started seeing roughly 35% open rates
almost immediately. 15,000 people
roughly at 35% open rates generated on
average 5,250
actual opens compared to the original
50,000 people at 8% which only generates
roughly 4,000 opens. Fewer subscribers
but more engagement, more revenue, and
most importantly a much stronger signal
to the algorithm that this sender
provides genuine value. But list pruning
is only one step. The marketers who
consistently hit 30 plus% open rates
treat their sender reputation like a
credit score. And just like your credit
score, there is specific behaviors that
either build or destroy your standing.
Email marketing isn't just a one-way
broadcast anymore. To succeed today, you
need to stop thinking like a sender and
start thinking like a relationship
builder. Every email you send either
builds or erodess trust with inbox
algorithms. So you need to make a
decision that are not just based on
immediate results but on long-term
deliverability help. This long-term
thinking shows up in three critical
ways. First, they maintain religiously
consistent sending schedules. Just like
erratic behavior might concern a friend,
irregular email patterns signal
unpredictability to algorithms. If you
normally send twice a week and suddenly
blast five emails in one day, the system
notices and starts watching you more
closely. Second, they respect the
boundaries of their subscriber
relationship. They understand that trust
is built through reliability, not
intensity. This means resisting the
temptation to overcommunicate during
product launches or sales events.
Instead, they plan their communication
calendar to maintain steady, valuable
contact without overwhelming their
audience. Third, they pay attention to
the subtle signals that indicate that
they're growing algorithmic trust.
Higher inbox placement rates, improved
open rates over time, and fewer spam
complaints. When they see these positive
indicators, they know they're building
the kind of reputation that will serve
them in the long term. Most importantly,
they understand that the modern inbox AI
doesn't just count opens and clicks. It
analyzes context, timing, and behavioral
patterns. It notices when engagement
happens quickly after delivery versus
hours later. It recognizes the
difference between a quick delete and a
careful read followed by a click. This
deeper understanding leads to more
sophisticated strategies that are
focused on meaningful engagement rather
than just vanity metrics. Now, even if
you nail everything I just shared,
there's still one thing 90% of marketers
still do that screw everything up
without realizing the damage they're
doing.
I see this mistake nine out of 10 email
campaigns I review. They're sending the
same email to everyone on your list. It
sounds normal, right? But when you do
that, you're essentially just asking the
algorithm to judge you based on the
average response you get across your
subscribers. If half your list finds
your email irrelevant, the algorithm
doesn't distinguish between the engage
half and the disengage half. It sees the
blended performance and makes
deliverability decisions. based on that.
This is why email segmentation has
evolved from a nice to have feature to
becoming absolutely necessary for your
brand survival. But we're not just
talking about basic demographic
segmentation here. The kind of
segmentation that works in today's
environment focuses on behavioral
patterns that predict genuine
engagement. The best approach I've seen
prioritizes engagement histories as a
primary filter. This means identifying
who opened your last five emails, who
clicked the last three call to actions
and who replied to recent messages.
These kind of behaviors are strong
predictors of future engagement and
exactly the signals inbox algorithms use
to evaluate sender reputation. Beyond
engagement history, successful marketers
segment based on the customer journey.
Someone who subscribed yesterday has
completely different needs than someone
who has been receiving your emails for 6
months. Creating separate communication
tracks for new subscribers versus
engaged regulars and even re-engagement
campaigns dramatically improves overall
performance. I've seen clients increase
their email open rates by 15 to 20% by
just simply implementing behavior-based
segmentation. Just like someone comes to
your website, adds a product to
checkout, but doesn't completely buy.
You would send them a different email
than someone who's never even added a
product to a cart. You may want to run a
promotion with the person who abandoned
their cart because there's a good chance
they're interested in that product. And
by leveraging segmentation, it helps
ensure that your emails start reaching
the primary inbox more consistently,
which then amplifies every other
improvement you make. But even with
perfect segmentation, there's still one
thing that can instantly trigger spam
filters. And ironically, it's the thing
that most markers spend most time on and
money on.
It may seem counterintuitive at first,
but the more professionals your emails
look, the more likely they are to be
filtered out as spam or promotional.
This happens because inbox algorithms
have been trained on billions of emails
and learned to distinguish between
personal communication and marketing
messages. The visual cues that make
emails look professional, like branded
headers, colorful graphics, multiple
buttons, are actually red flags that
trigger algorithmic suspicion. Think
about the emails in your own inbox that
you actually read engage with. They're
probably simple textbased messages that
feel like they came from a real person,
right? The most successful email
marketers have embraced this constraint
as a creative opportunity. They focus on
conversational writing that doesn't need
visual tricks to hold attention. these
simple formatting, short paragraphs,
plenty of white space to create emails
that feel authentically personal. This
is a simple move that makes a big
difference. When your emails feel more
personal, they're less likely to get
flagged as promotions by the algorithm,
which means better deliverability. Plus,
people more likely to open and engage
with them because they come across as
more trustworthy and relevant. So far,
we talked about cleaning your list,
building trust, segmenting properly, and
keeping design simple. But what I'll
share with you next is going to be one
of the highest leverage tactics that you
can do for your email marketing success.
Of all the signals that inbox algorithms
track, nothing carries more weight than
a genuine reply. When someone takes the
time to respond to your email, it sends
an unmistakable message. This is
valuable and I want this communication.
A reply transforms your algorithmic
relationship in several ways. It signals
genuine interest, indicates recipients
view you as a real person worth
communicating with, and it creates
conversation threads that algorithms
recognize as high value interactions.
The power extends beyond individual
emails. Consistent replies categorize
you as a trusted sender, improving
deliverability across all future
messages. Even a few replies per email
can significantly boost your sender
reputation. This is why when I send out
emails, a lot of times I'll ask
questions because that enables me to get
thousands and sometimes tens of
thousands of replies. The key is ending
emails with authentic questions that
invite genuine responses. For example,
you can ask people for product feedback,
whether it's a physical product or even
a software. A e-commerce brand selling
homegoods might try, "What room in your
house needs the most help right now? I
love hearing about your projects and
sometimes share makeover tips based on
your responses." A B2B software company
could end with what's the most
frustrating part of your current
workflow. Reply and tell me, I'll use
these insights to shape our product
development so it'll help you out. The
difference is night and day. Personal
questions feel like a conversation, and
conversations get replies. The email
marketing landscape has fundamentally
changed, but the opportunity for those
who adapt have never been more exciting.
While many marketers struggle with
declining performance, those who have
learned to work with algorithmic systems
are seeing major success. Your goal is
no longer just growing your list. It's
building a community of engaged
subscribers who consistently interact
with your content. But all this inbox
optimization means nothing if you don't
have the right people to send to. Email
is the most profitable channel, but only
if you can consistently fill it up with
engaged subscribers. In my next video,
I'll show you search everywhere
optimization, the omni channel approach
that turns every piece of content into
an email list building